# Type II topoisomerases control 3D chromatin structure at positively supercoiled 
regions at boundaries of active chromatin with the nuclear lamina 

## Abstract
Spatial chromosome architecture is a key factor in eukaryotic gene regulation 
and genome stability, but how changes in local DNA topology coordinate with the 
3D chromosome organization remains poorly understood. Type II topoisomerases 
(TOP2s) resolve torsional stress accumulated during various cellular processes 
and are enriched at chromatin loop anchors and TAD boundaries, where, when 
trapped, can lead to genomic instability promoting formation of oncogenic 
fusions. However, whether TOP2s function at these boundaries to relieve 
topological constraints associated with chromatin loop extrusion and/or 
participate in spatial chromosome folding per se, remains unclear. Here, we 
combine 3D genomics, high-throughput imaging and GapRun, a novel method for 
profiling positive supercoiling genome-wide in human cells, to assess the role 
of TOP2s in shaping chromosome organization throughout the cell cycle. Acute 
TOP2 depletion led to the emergence of new, large-scale contacts at the 
boundaries between active, positively supercoiled domains and lamina-associated 
domains (LADs) in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. TOP2-dependent changes at the 
higher-order chromatin folding were accompanied by remodeling of 
chromatin-nuclear lamina interactions and changes in gene expression, while at 
the local, chromatin loop level, TOP2 depletion remodeled predominantly 
transcriptionally-anchored loops, enriched for positive supercoiling and TOP2 
activity. We propose that TOP2s act as a fine-regulator of chromosome folding 
at multiple scales. 

